cansav09/sc-rna_seq-reorganization (#28)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: scRNA-seq/post-processing_scRNA-seq.Rmd

---
title: "scRNA-seq_post_processing"
output:   
  html_notebook: 
    toc: true
    toc_float: true
---

**CCDL 2019**

In this notebook, we'll perform quality control analyses and normalization of 
scRNA-seq count data. 

> As opposed to bulk rna-seq, there are there are a few main things to look out for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As opposed to bulk RNA-seq, there are there are a few main things to look out for
```

Please stick to `RNA-seq`

in single cell RNA-seq:

> **Single-cell rna-seq has...**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Single-cell RNA-seq has...**  
```

Reviewer: Is it `single-cell` or `single cell`? You use both. I also think this should be **Single cell RNA-seq:** (this is not me weighing in on the style of `single cell`)

Author: In papers I see it both ways, but I think I see it with the `-` more than without, so I've gone back and added `-` everywhere.

> - More amplification (and more of it's associated biases and error)  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Requires more PCR amplification (and therefore more PCR-associated biases and error)  
```

> - More 0's in the gene expression data (most genes aren't expressed across cell types)  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- More zeroes in the gene expression data (most genes aren't expressed across cell types).
People sometimes refer to this as "sparsity" or "dropout."
```
Trying to introduce people to how researchers that are more methodologically inclined talk about different problems or phenomena wherever possible.

> This script is adapted from 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This script is adapted from the
```

Reviewer: This is also not technically a script.

> [Seurat pbmc tutorial](https://satijalab.org/seurat/pbmc3k_tutorial.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Seurat PBMC tutorial](https://satijalab.org/seurat/pbmc3k_tutorial.html)
```

  
#### Set Up 
For these analyses, we will need Seurat a lot, so we will go ahead and attach it.  
```{r Set Up}
# Attach library
library(Seurat)
```

#### Import single cell RNA-seq counts matrix

> Here we are importing a counts matrix from single cell rna-seq data that has 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we are importing a counts matrix from single cell RNA-seq data that has 
```

already been processed using Salmon and tximport and saved the counts to a tsv 
file. 
This [data set](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE84465) 
is glioblastoma data that was Fluorescent Activated Cell sorted 

> and then was processed by paired end sequencing using smart-seq2 protocol 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and then was processed by paired end sequencing using Smart-seq2 protocol 
```

> [(Darmanis et al, 2017).](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29091775) 

Reviewer: Here's the citation style we use elsewhere: Harenza, et al. _Scientific Data._ 2017.

```{r Import Data}
# Read in the data
sc_data <- readr::read_tsv(file.path("data", "darmanis_counts.tsv")) %>% 

>            tibble::column_to_rownames("gene") %>% 

Reviewer: If you take a look at the initial notebooks, the style looks like this:
```
sig_summary_df <- plier_results$summary %>%
  dplyr::filter(FDR < 0.05,
                AUC > 0.75)
```
For piping. We should be consistent.

           as.data.frame()
```

#### Set up the Seurat object and apply a filter to the data. 
In this example, we are applying a gene filter cutoff of at least 3 cells 
expressing each gene. 
For cell filtering, each cell must express at least 200 genes.
```{r Set Up Seurat Object}
# Set up the seurat object 
seurat_obj <- CreateSeuratObject(raw.data = sc_data, min.cells = 3,
                                 min.genes = 200, 
                                 project = "darmanis_gbm")
```

#### Normalize the data using log normalization
These are the default settings for normalization and should work in most 
instances. 
```{r Normalize the Data}
seurat_norm <- NormalizeData(object = seurat_obj, 
                             normalization.method = "LogNormalize",
                             scale.factor = 10000)
```

#### Identify variable genes and scale the data
In this step, we will identify genes with higher variance. 

> These are probably the genes that are of more interest to us.

Reviewer: https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/pull/19#discussion_r253635069

```

#### Identify variable genes and scale the data

As we mentioned, there are mores genes that have zeroes in single-cell RNA-seq 
data but our filtering step has hopefully removed all of these low-to-no 
expression genes.
However, the rest of the transcriptome is usually overwhelmed by a few genes that 
are highly expressed, but don't change much with different circumstances (think 
housekeeping-like genes). 
These housekeeping-like genes also are unlikely to be helpful for us in looking 
for biologically meaningful gene expression patterns. 

> To avoid our analyses being watered down by these low variance genes, we want to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid our analyses being "watered down" by these low variance genes, we want to
```

identify a subset of high variance genes that may be more informative about the 
differences between cells. 
The Seurat function `FindVariableGenes` will do this for us and print out 

> a expression by variance plot so we can get an overall picture of the genes 

Reviewer: You've set `do.plot = FALSE` in `FindVariableGenes`. I would not reference printing out a plot here.

Author: Whoops that's a remnant.

being expressed in our dataset. 
```{r Find Variable Genes}
seurat_norm <- FindVariableGenes(seurat_norm, mean.function = ExpMean,
                                 do.plot = FALSE)
# Scale the data
seurat_norm <- ScaleData(seurat_norm)
```
Let's plot the variance and the expression of the genes. 

> On your own, it would probably be good practice to see how this graph changes 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On your own, it's good practice to see how this graph changes 
```

with changes of normalization parameters, as well as high variance gene cutoffs. 
```{r Plot Variable Genes}
# Make a variable of which genes are included as high or low variance
var_gene <- is.na(match(rownames(seurat_norm@hvg.info), seurat_norm@var.genes))

> var_gene <- c("low_var", "high_var")[as.factor(var_gene)]

Reviewer: I would get rid of this and make the change I'll suggest below

# Extract variance stats from Seurat object
var_stats <- data.frame(seurat_norm@hvg.info) %>%

>   dplyr:: mutate(as.factor(var_gene))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  dplyr:: mutate(var_gene = factor(var_gene, levels = c("low_var", "high_var")))
```

Author: Noice. Yes this is better.

Author: Turns out this doesn't work.

# Let's plot this with ggplot2
ggplot(var_stats, aes(x = gene.mean, y = gene.dispersion.scaled, color = var_gene)) +

>   geom_point() +

Reviewer: Try setting alpha, `alpha = 0.2` maybe
